---
title: Class 13 - 1 Peter, 2 Peter, Jude
subtitle: New Testament Seminar
institute: Immanuel Church
header-includes:
 - \usepackage{fancyhdr}
 - \pagestyle{fancy}
 - \fancyhead[RO,RE]{Class 13 - 1 Peter, 2 Peter, Jude}
 - \fancyhead[LO,LE]{New Testament Seminar}
 - \usepackage{tikz}
 - \usetikzlibrary{calc,shapes.multipart,chains,arrows}
fontfamily: libertine
fontfamilyoptions: sfdefault
---

# 1 Peter: Suffering in the Kingdom

In the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus said to his disciples, _"Then Jesus said to his 
disciples, “If anyone wants to follow after me, let him deny himself, take up 
his cross, and follow me."_ (Matthew 16:24). These words must have had a 
shocking effect on the crowd. Remember, these were Roman times. The cross Jesus 
was calling them to bear was not the nice spiritual symbol that we, in our day 
and age, see hanging from the necks, and tattooed on the biceps, of pop 
musicians or professional athletes, Christians and non-Christians alike.

No, the cross in Jesus’ time was a cruel instrument of state execution, a place 
where people suffered and bled and died. Here in this verse, Jesus was alerting 
his followers to a fundamental reality about the Christian life—namely, that it 
involves suffering. Jesus, in this verse was making clear that he was on his way 
to the cross and that if we would be his followers, we must go that way as well.

This is not to say that Christians are called to go out and court hostility 
through needless and unwise provocations. But in a world that is hostile towards 
God, it only follows that God’s people will face persecution as they seek to 
glorify him. Paul even says it point blank in 2 Timothy 3:12: "_In fact, all who 
want to live a godly life in Christ Jesus will be persecuted._."

Paul’s words accurately describe the experience of countless saints throughout 
church history, and if we would endeavor to pursue a godly life, then they will 
describe ours, as well.

So, why do Christians suffer and how should Christians, in the midst of 
suffering, respond?

To answer these questions and others, we turn this morning to the book of 1 
Peter. As much as any book in the New Testament, 1 Peter deals with suffering, 
why it occurs, what it’s for, and what we’re supposed to do when it comes our 
way.

So, in typical Core-seminar fashion, we’ll begin our study by considering some 
background information about 1 Peter before turning to the outline of the book 
[which you’ll see on the second page of the handout], then the major themes, and 
some practical application.

## Purpose

1 Peter has been described as a model of the “pastoral letter.” The writer, the 
apostle Peter, clearly intends in this book to refresh believers who are 
suffering for Christ with line after line of comforting truth. This comforting 
takes two forms.

__First__, it comes in the form of encouragement. We can see this in passages 
such as 1 Peter 1:3-6:

> Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Because of his great 
> mercy he has given us new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of 
> Jesus Christ from the dead and into an inheritance that is imperishable, 
> undefiled, and unfading, kept in heaven for you. You are being guarded by 
> God’s power through faith for a salvation that is ready to be revealed in the 
> last time. You rejoice in this, even though now for a short time, if 
> necessary, you suffer grief in various trials

The tone of these verses is incredibly optimistic—ecstatic, you might even say. 
Peter’s optimism might seem ironic or even delusional at first, given the 
difficult circumstances these Christians find themselves in, but unlike the 
baseless morale boosting so commonly incanted in our culture—the clichéd 
“everything is going to be alright” or “just positive thinking will get you 
through!”—the comfort offered in these verses is rooted in a historical fact of 
monumental significance: the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

Jesus’ resurrection—the fact that he defeated death and is alive and reigns now 
as King—gives Christians a “Living hope” and an “inheritance,” as verse 4 says, 
“that is imperishable, undefiled, and unfading.” _The hope and inheritance that 
we have in Christ helps put our sufferings in this world in much-needed 
perspective._ Indeed, in light of the riches we have in Christ and which we will 
enjoy for all __eternity__, this life and its hardships seem only like “__a 
short time__,” as it says in verse 6. _We’ll come back to this perspective in 
more depth later in the class._

__The second type__ of comfort the author gives in 1 Peter comes in the form of 
imperatives, or commands. Any of you who have run a marathon, taken the bar 
exam, or even experienced something as minor as a flat tire know something of 
the comfort that comes from being prepared, from having been instructed in how 
to respond.

We see this kind of comfort offered in passages such as 1 Peter 3:9, which 
commands suffering Christians, not to "_[pay] back evil for evil or insult for 
insult but, on the contrary, giving a blessing, since you were called for this, 
so that you may inherit a blessing._" When people insult us for loving Christ, 
we are to bless them, pray for them, and love them, taking queues from how 
Christ has loved us, we who were once his enemies. Following Christ, in other 
words, does not just mean that we suffer in the way Christ suffered, but also 
that we must respond to suffering as Christ did.

So, How did Jesus respond to persecution? 1 Peter 2:23 reminds us. It says:

> when he was insulted, he did not insult in return; when he suffered, he did 
> not threaten but entrusted himself to the one who judges justly.

By blending Christ-centered imperatives like this with profound words of 
encouragement, 1 Peter offers an amazing arsenal of comfort for Christians who 
are suffering for the kingdom.

## Date & Audience

And suffering for the kingdom is exactly what Peter’s audience was doing: From 
Peter’s continued references to insults, slander, and malicious speech—he calls 
their troubles a “fiery ordeal” in 4:12—it seems that the Christians to whom he 
is writing are facing abuse, and verbal abuse in particular. Perhaps their 
devotion to Christ has made them the butt of jokes or the subjects of nasty 
diatribes in the town square. If you have ever had an unbelieving family member 
upbraid you for sharing your faith or worked under a boss who makes jokes about 
Christians, then you know the sting of such persecution, how it can lead to 
tears, even despair.

Peter pens his letter for such an audience feeling the bitter sting of social 
ostracism because of their allegiance to Christ.

We know a bit about the location of the original audience as well: Look at verse 
1: “_To those chosen, living as exiles dispersed abroad in Pontus, Galatia, 
Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia_” -- he is writing to Christians in what is now 
modern day Turkey.

And we have a good idea of where Peter was when he wrote this: he gives us some 
clues in 5:13, as he concludes the book. In that verse, he makes reference to 
writing from Babylon. Here, as in Revelation, Babylon is likely a symbolic 
reference to the city of Rome.

Also, In that same verse, Peter refers to Mark, but not to Paul. This is telling 
because we know that Paul was with Mark in Rome until 62 AD, the year that Paul 
was released from his first Roman imprisonment. For this reason, most scholars 
believe that 1 Peter was written around AD 63, after Paul’s release but before 
the Roman Emperor Nero’s intense persecution of Christians begins. So this 
letter was not penned to Christians experiencing the threat of imprisonment and 
death; that was to come later. Instead, the persecution these believers were 
facing was of a type that we would more commonly face here, today, in Knoxville 
as family, friends, and even strangers mock us for our hope in Christ.

The date of the book is important to understand because it means that the letter 
was not only a comfort to Christians already in the midst of suffering, whether 
social or economic, but that it was also helping to prepare its readers for 
harsher forms of persecution that were to come – (We might also consider that 
we, in studying this book now, may be doing the same thing ...).

## Structure & Outline

Let’s now take a look at the structure of the book, which will introduce us to 
some of the themes that we will discuss in more detail in a few minutes.

So, how does Peter organize his encouragements and commands? Unlike Paul’s 
letters, which often divide nicely into sections of theological argument and 
then sections of application, 1 Peter fuses the two, tethering imperatives to 
theology and vice versa, often in the space of a single verse. You will find 
that Peter reprises similar themes again and again, adding layers and nuances as 
he moves along.

Throughout, Christ is presented as the unique and blameless savior who rescues 
his people from the eternal suffering that they deserve. He is also presented as 
an example of how God’s people are to face up to suffering this side of heaven.

### Chapter 1:1-2

Peter begins the letter by describing Christians in two ways. First off, he 
calls them “_those chosen_,” God’s chosen people, his representatives in the 
world. Then, in the very next phrase, he refers to them as “_exiles dispersed 
abroad_.” This juxtaposition—that Christians are both God’s elect and strangers 
in the world—helps order Peter’s commands and encouragements throughout the 
letter. First, he will focus on what it means to be “_elect_,” and then move to 
what it means to be “_strangers in the world_.”

### Chapter 1:3—2:10

And then we jump into the letter with verse 3 of chapter 1. The benefits and 
demands of being God’s elect, God’s chosen people, are the focus of this 
section, through 2:10. Peter reminds us of the living hope and inheritance we 
have in Christ. As we read in verses 10-12 of chapter 1, our salvation is made 
all the more glorious because of how it was prophesied in the Old Testament. So 
glorious is our salvation, in fact, that, "angles long to catch a glimpse of 
these things" Peter writes in verse 12, before shifting to the responsibilities 
that come with being identified as God’s people. This section is perhaps best 
summed up in verses 15 and 16, in which Peter demands of Christians what God 
demanded of his people in the Old Testament. He writes:

> But as the one who called you is holy, you also are to be holy in all your 
> conduct; for it is written, Be holy, because I am holy.

### Chapter 2:11—4:11

In the next section, the longest in the letter, Peter elaborates on the fact 
that God’s holy people are also, quote, “sojourners and exiles.” To this end, he 
implores them, in the words of a couple New Testament scholars, to exhibit “_a 
lifestyle different from, yet attractive to, the hostile world in which they 
live_.” Being saved from the fate of this world does not exempt us from our 
responsibilities as workers and citizens and spouses. No, in fact our salvation 
frees us to be faithful in our sundry roles. The lifestyle Peter has in mind is 
characterized supremely by Christ-like submission—along with good and peaceful 
relationships with other Christians, and wherever possible, with non-Christians, 
too.

### Chapter 4:12—5:14

In this final section, in many ways the crescendo of the book, Peter launches 
into appropriate responses to suffering. He is emphatic that Christians endure 
suffering “according to God’s will” by 1) entrusting their lives and 
circumstances to God and 2) by continuing to live righteously. Peter begins in 
4:12, "_Dear friends, don’t be surprised when the fiery ordeal comes among you 
to test you... Instead, rejoice as you share in the sufferings of Christ_" Also, 
chapter 5 calls on church leaders to care for the flock for the right reasons 
and on church members, “young men” especially, to submit to their overseers. And 
the book closes with Peter urging his audience once more to “Stand firm.”

----

You might summarize the book, then, in this way: The topic is persecution, and 
our confidence is the living hope and inheritance we have in Christ. But what is 
our goal? What are we to work toward given that confidence? IT IS NOT simply to 
survive persecution, BUT to turn it into a witness. 2:12, "_Conduct yourselves 
honorably among the Gentiles, so that when they slander you as evildoers, they 
will observe your good works and will glorify God on the day he visits._"

Now, what primarily will accomplish that? What aspects of life should we focus 
on to put forward a positive witness in the mist of persecution? The answer is 
surprising. Submit to the State. Submit to your boss. Submit to your husband. 
Submit to the church. Submission. To authority. A good thing to think through 
the next time you struggle in this area: right behavior toward authority is a 
primary way in which we witness to the truth of the gospel, even in times of 
suffering.

Now that we have got our bearings in 1 Peter, having covered some of the 
background and structure of the book, let’s turn to some major themes.

## Major Themes

As I mentioned in the introduction, 1 Peter is a book for Christians going 
through tough times. But let’s be clear, Peter is not talking about the 
suffering people face when they do evil. This letter is not written to crooks, 
for instance, offering them pointers about how to endure a prison sentence. 
 Peter writes in 2:20: "_For what credit is there if when you do wrong and 
 are beaten, you endure it? But when you do what is good and suffer, if you 
 endure it, this brings favor with God._" Christians should never face this 
 kind of suffering, the suffering that comes from doing wrong, because 
 Christians should not do such things. And by extension, Peter isn’t writing 
 about suffering that stems from our foolishness, like not managing our money 
 well, refusing good counsel, or harboring ungodly patterns of thinking.

But neither is Peter talking about the suffering that comes, say, from things 
like natural disasters, wars, or economic turmoil. He is not talking about 
unemployment or disease or broken hearts. Although we find direction for some of 
those situations other places in Scripture, and although the pain caused by them 
is real and can be devastating – Peter has another kind of suffering in mind in 
1 Peter: That is, _explicitly_ the suffering that comes from following Christ.

His readers were going through rough times because of their faith. Once, these 
individuals were accepted by everyone as good people. Now that they had become 
Christians and were doing good, they were suffering “various trials.” (1:6).

Well, a number of questions result. (1) Why is this suffering occurring? (2) 
When will it end? (3) And how can we endure in the meantime? The answers to 
those questions, the themes that run through this letter, are our focus for the 
rest of our time together this morning.

We’ll begin by answering that question, “why is this suffering happening?” by 
looking _first_ at the relationship between holiness and suffering, and then the 
relationship between Christ’s suffering and ours. We’ll answer the question, 
“When will it end” by taking up the _third theme_, that of vindication. And then 
finally, we’ll answer “How can we endure?” by examining Peter’s theme of a right 
response to suffering. We’ll step through each of these four themes in turn.

### A. The relationship between holiness and suffering

First, Peter makes it clear that Christians suffer because God is our Creator 
and Lord, and he has chosen us to be his special people. Think back to chapter 
one, verse one. God’s elect, strangers in this world. Cause and effect. As God’s 
elect, we are called out of this world to be holy, to be set apart. Peter writes 
in chapter 2:

> But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for his 
> possession, so that you may proclaim the praises of the one who called you out 
> of darkness into his marvelous light. Once you were not a people, but now you 
> are God’s people; you had not received mercy, but now you have received mercy. 
> (2:9-10).

Notice that _God_ has done this. We were not his people, and then he made us his 
people. And now that we have been made holy, we are called to live lives of 
holiness. SO GOD MAKES US NEW, and then we LIVE ANEW. As Peter writes in chapter 
1:

> As obedient children, do not be conformed to the desires of your former 
> ignorance. But as the one who called you is holy, you also are to be holy in 
> all your conduct; for it is written, Be holy, because I am holy. (1:14-16).

Our holiness, like God’s holiness, combines the idea of “set-apartness” and the 
idea of Christ-like purity. God has made us holy. And if God’s people live as a 
holy people, the world will think they are strange. Why? Because Christians live 
in reverent fear of God rather than in conformity to the world. The Christian, 
as Peter writes in chapter 4:2, is the one who will

> ...live the remaining time in the flesh no longer for human desires, but for 
> God’s will. For there has already been enough time spent in doing what the 
> Gentiles choose to do: carrying on in unrestrained behavior, evil desires, 
> drunkenness, orgies, carousing, and lawless idolatry. They are surprised that 
> you don’t join them in the same flood of wild living—and they slander you. 
> (4:2-4)

Christians, in a sense, live in two worlds at once. The new world has begun for 
us because God has given us a new birth. On the other hand, we continue to live 
within the old world, which is the only world non-Christians see. So our actions 
and attitudes, comments and commitments, seem strange, even bizarre, to them. 

You see, Christianity is not solely an argument over doctrine. It is also a 
witness borne by the way your new life says to your non-Christian friends, 
“There is a different way to live.” And the fact is that people do not like to 
be confronted with a different way to live. It implies that they might need to 
change the way they are living.

So what do we do with this first theme? It’s a reminder that some degree of 
abuse from the world around us is not only normal for Christians, it is a good 
diagnostic that things are going well for us in our life of love for God. So use 
this letter both to inform exactly how our lives should be different from the 
world around us, and as a source of comfort when that holiness results in 
persecution, as it so often does.

### B. The relationship between Christ’s sufferings and ours

But as I mentioned earlier, there is a second reason why we suffer as 
Christians: we are, in fact, called by God to _participate_ in the sufferings of 
Christ.

The book is replete with references to the suffering of Christ, to his blood, to 
his rejection, and to his death. In the most importance sense, Christ’s 
sufferings were unique. He died for our sins. Christ was a substitute, bearing 
God’s punishment for those who would repent and believe in him. But in a 
secondary sense, Peter hears a calling and sees an example for the Christian in 
Christ’s sufferings. They present a model for what we Christians are to do as we 
continually repent of our sins and follow him. 

In 2:20-21, Peter writes, "_For what credit is there if when you do wrong and 
are beaten, you endure it? But when you do what is good and suffer, if you 
endure it, this brings favor with God. For you were called to this, because 
Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an example, that you should follow in 
his steps._"

So with this in mind, we recognize that we suffer because Christ suffered. And 
just as his sufferings made more glorious his victory over sin, our suffering 
will result in all the more joy when he and his people are finally vindicated.

### C. Future vindication

But suffering is not the only thing promised for those who follow Christ. A 
third theme of 1 Peter is that one day our suffering will end. Christ may be our 
example in suffering but he is also our example in vindication. Don’t miss this: 
Our rejection on earth is a passing human verdict. It is not final, and it is 
not divine. We will be saved through Christ’s own vindication. Peter presents 
Noah as an example of one who was vindicated in chapter 3, verse 20-22. In the 
ark built by Noah, it says:

> who in the past were disobedient, when God patiently waited in the days of 
> Noah while the ark was being prepared. In it a few—that is, eight people—were 
> saved through water. Baptism, which corresponds to this, now saves you (not 
> as the removal of dirt from the body, but the pledge of a good conscience 
> toward God) through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, who has gone into heaven 
> and is at the right hand of God with angels, authorities, and powers subject 
> to him.

Recall how Noah was ostracized by his neighbors for trusting God and building 
the ark. Recall God’s faithfulness to him, and his small crew, during the flood. 
So you, Christian, if you struggle in the face of opposition, wondering if 
something is wrong because of your suffering, look to the example of Christ. 
Look also to the example of Noah. God _will_ vindicate those who truly follow 
him.

### D. Right responses to suffering

So we’ve established that suffering for us as Christians is a given – for at 
time – but that it too will pass, as God vindicates us in his glory. But let’s 
zero-in a bit more on this theme of suffering. Peter has much to say on how we 
ought to respond:

So first, we are to be Witnesses...

#### 1. Witness

Peter calls on us, in the midst of suffering, to be witnesses to non-Christians 
and even to desire the good of those who persecute us. Peter, the disciple who 
denied Jesus three times and then watched Jesus suffer for him, learned this 
from Jesus’ example. He writes,

> when he was insulted, he did not insult in return; when he suffered, he did 
> not threaten but entrusted himself to the one who judges justly. He himself 
> bore our sins in his body on the tree; so that, having died to sins, we might 
> live for righteousness. By his wounds you have been healed. (2:23-24).

Peter knew firsthand the forgiveness of Christ. He knew firsthand how good 
Christ could be even toward one who had denied him. We must also remember how 
good God has been to us. We deserted him, yet he responded with incredible love 
toward us. How then can we treat those who mock us in any other way?

#### 2. Love

Peter also calls us to show love to one another. This is particularly difficult 
and important when the church is suffering through strife and persecution. You 
know how when the going gets tough, we can grow short with one another or 
withdraw from one another completely [this is something I struggle with 
personally – I am inclined to withdraw when in tense situations]. When stress 
afflicts the church from the outside, stress on the inside follows. Just as 
pressure causes cracks to appear in a building, so it will cause fissures in 
churches. So Peter writes very clearly in 4:7-10:

> The end of all things is near; therefore, be alert and sober-minded for 
> prayer. Above all, maintain constant love for one another, since love covers a 
> multitude of sins. Be hospitable to one another without complaining. Just as 
> each one has received a gift, use it to serve others, as good stewards of the 
> varied grace of God.

In times of strife and spiritual attack, Christians should band together, uphold 
one another—in short, love one another with the very love of Christ.

#### 3. Submit

Finally, and perhaps most surprisingly in a book concerned with suffering, we 
have Peter’s extended imperative that Christians submit to authority. He keeps 
this theme up beginning in chapter 2:13, and running through much of chapter 3. 
In chapter 2:13: "_Submit to every human authority because of the Lord, whether 
to the emperor as the supreme authority [14] or to governors as those sent out 
by him to punish those who do what is evil and to praise those who do what is 
good._"

He goes on to command servants to submit to and respect their masters, wives to 
be subject to their husbands, and, later, he calls on the church to submit to 
and serve each other. Why so important?

Submission—to authorities, to husbands, to masters, to elders, to one another—is 
befitting of Christians because it displays our hope and trust in a higher 
authority – it enhances our witness about God. Paul, in Romans 13, confirms that 
God has instituted and ordered authority in the world:

> ...[T]here is no authority except from God, and the authorities that exist are 
> instituted by God. So then, the one who resists the authority is opposing 
> God’s command, and those who oppose it will bring judgment on themselves. 
> (13:1b-2).

Christians should respect authority because it comes from God, and this bolsters 
our witness as those who follow God. 

But what about when this authority is abused, and even used to ridicule us for 
doing good? Should Christians respect authority then? Well, though we should 
never submit to authority to the point that we disobey God, Peter—like Paul in 
Romans—makes it clear that the normal pattern is for Christians to submit to 
authority, in good times and in bad. 

This brings us to the second reason why submission is befitting for Christians: 
because it evidences our eternal freedom in Christ. Peter’s admonition in 2:13, 
"_Submit to every human authority because of the Lord_" is paired in verse 16, 
with the admonition “_Submit as free people, not using your freedom as a 
cover-up for evil_” As Christians we can submit, even if we are persecuted for 
our faith by the people in authority over us, because we know that Christ, the 
ultimate authority, who was raised from the dead and now sits at the right hand 
of God, will have the final word.

So we have nothing, ultimately, to fear. We are free. And we can submit, and 
even do it with joy, knowing that we are living in a way that commends Christ.

So Peter instructs slaves or servants in 2:18-19, to "_Household slaves, submit 
to your masters with all reverence not only to the good and gentle ones but also 
to the cruel. For it brings favor if, because of a consciousness of God, someone 
endures grief from suffering unjustly._"

[Passages like this are particularly meaningful to me when I contemplate the 
various injustices that each of us may see or experience at work – if we have a 
boss who manages selfishly, or even acts cruelly or mockingly once he or she 
understands your faith.]

Likewise, Peter commands wives in the beginning of chapter 3 to "_[W]ives, 
submit yourselves to your own husbands so that, even if some disobey the word, 
they may be won over without a word by the way their wives live_"

In both of these instances – submitting to your master, or submitting to your 
husband – submission is presented as a way to witness to the lost and share in 
Christ’s sufferings. Peter again reminds us that we have the greatest example of 
submission in Christ himself: 1 Peter 2:23, tells us, Christ "_did not insult in 
return; when he suffered, he did not threaten but entrusted himself to the one 
who judges justly_"

## Conclusion

Well then, it’s time to conclude. Peter punctuates his letter with marshalling 
words of encouragement. Read with me just a few of these strung together: 

_“Prepare your minds for action ... Arm yourselves with the same way of thinking 
(as Christ) ... Be self controlled and alert ... commit [yourself] to [your] 
faithful Creator and continue to do good ... Stand firm._” (1:13, 4:1, 4:19, 
5:8, 5:12).

Peter himself did that. Early historical sources inform us that Peter died being 
crucified in Rome as a martyr, because he was living for Christ. Commit yourself 
to your faithful Creator and continue. Stand fast.

Consider what God is calling _you_ to. Are you being called to an initial 
commitment to Christ? To give up a particular sin? To be a witness? To _go_ for 
him? To _stay_ for him? What is holding you back? “Commit [yourself] to [your] 
faithful Creator and continue ...” Continue to do good.

# 2 Peter & Jude: Perseverance in the Midst of Falsehood

## Introduction & Purpose: False Teaching “Among You”

One of my favorite things to do when I take a flight somewhere is to spend some 
time browsing through the airport bookstore. The bookstore is a reminder that 
we live in a pluralistic age, where atheist manifestos sit in the same sale bin 
as Buddhist meditation guides and commentaries on the Qur’an. As a Christian, I 
walk through and notice plenty of falsehood: everything from the book _God Is 
Not Great_ by the late atheist Christopher Hitchens, to a Hindu text promising 
“A Life of Purpose, Happiness, Prosperity, and Freedom.” 

Now, I must say that it’s discouraging to see these titles; these books are 
dangerous, they deny the one true God. But it typically doesn’t ruin my flight – 
this is what we expect from people who don’t claim to believe in Jesus. _But_ 
what happens when I get to the Christian section of the bookstore? Is that shelf 
full of truth? If I grab any book with a Christian label, will I arrive in my 
destination as a wiser and more faithful follower of Christ? 

With that question in mind, listen to the Apostle Peter’s words from 2 Peter 
2:1: "_There were indeed false prophets among the people, just as there will be 
false teachers among you. They will bring in destructive heresies_". And then 
listen to the 4th verse of the letter written by Jude: "_For some people, who 
were designated for this judgment long ago, have come in by stealth; they are 
ungodly, turning the grace of our God into sensuality and denying Jesus Christ, 
our only Master and Lord._"

In 2 Peter, there “will be” false teachers that come; in Jude, they have already 
“crept in” unnoticed. But did you hear that both authors use phrasing to suggest 
that these folks will be “__among you__.” These two letters aren’t about 
defending the faith against Roman polytheism or Greek philosophy. They’re 
fighting something even more dangerous: falsehood with the Christian label. 
Poison wrapped up like a candy bar. The question is: will we be those who eat 
the poison? Or will we be alert and aware? As you see there under “purpose,” 
Peter and Jude write _To warn Christians against false teaching and to encourage 
them to persevere in the true faith_.

So, first, we’ll look at some background and an outline for each book, and then 
we’ll talk about four main themes, four certainties that these books call us to 
know. We’re going to jump around a bunch between these two letters, so you’ll 
want to keep your finger or a pen on both of them as we go. 

## II. Authorship, Audience & Context

Let’s begin by talking about who’s writing. __Please turn to 2 Peter__ 1:1. The 
book begins, “_Simeon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who 
have received a faith equal to ours through the righteousness of our God and 
Savior Jesus Christ_” We see the author here identifies himself as Peter, and 
then look at 1:16: “_For we did not follow cleverly contrived myths when we made 
known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; instead we were 
eyewitnesses of his majesty._” Peter goes on to tell about how he personally saw 
the transfiguration of Jesus. 

Who’s Peter writing to? Look over at 3:1: “_Dear friends, this is now the second 
letter I have written to you; in both letters, I want to stir up your sincere 
understanding by way of reminder,_” It’s likely that the first letter is the 
Biblical letter of 1 Peter, which as we saw in 1 Peter 1:1 was written to 
Christians scattered throughout Asia Minor, modern day Turkey. Peter wrote that 
letter to encourage believers as they suffered through persecution. But now, 
it’s not just attacks from the outside that concern Peter – it’s attacks from 
within. And Peter says in 1:14 that “_since I know that I will soon lay aside my 
tent._” – he can tell that his death is near. And so he pens one final warning 
to his people.

__Turn over to Jude__ and let’s ask some of the same questions. Who wrote it? 
Verse 1, “_Jude a servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James._” Scholars agree 
that the James he’s talking about is James the half-brother of Jesus and the 
leader of the Jerusalem church who wrote the book of James. This means that Jude 
too is a brother of Jesus.[^1]

Who is he writing to? Verse 1 makes it clear that his audience is Christians: 
“_To those who are the called, loved by God the Father and kept for Jesus 
Christ._” When we look at the rest of the letter, we can guess that his readers 
were most likely Jewish Christians, because Jude refers to some characters and 
stories that would have been known in the Jewish community. Now, if you read 
through Jude this week, you’ll probably be curious about these references 
because a couple of them don’t actually come from the Old Testament. Jude 
alludes to a story about the archangel Michael in verse 9[^2] and quotes from a 
book called 1st Enoch in verse 14. What’s Jude doing here? He’s not saying that 
these things are scripture. Instead, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, 
he’s illustrating his points using stories that his audience would be familiar 
with. The things he refers to are true, but he’s not suggesting that all of 1 
Enoch is inspired or inerrant. Paul did the same thing when he quoted true 
statements from non-inspired Greek philosophers in Acts 17 and 1 Corinthians 
15[^3]. 

Now, one of the interesting things about these two books is just how alike they 
are. They don’t just deal with similar themes, they actually share the same 
language in many places. For this reason, it’s likely that the books were 
written in light of each other. In the early days of Christianity, letters such 
as these would have been widely distributed, so it seems like for the sake of 
having a unified message, one of the writers decided to echo phrases and themes 
from the other letter. You see in your handout there a chart that shows which 
verses resemble each other. You can look at that at home and notice all the 
similarities. 

Which letter came first? Really hard to say. But whatever the order of 
authorship, what we should take away is that the reality of false teaching was 
serious enough to deserve two letters in the New Testament, and so it’s 
certainly serious enough for us to take notice and examine closely.

## III. Outline

With that background in place, let’s look at how these books are structured so 
we can see how the authors mount their arguments. You’ll see the outlines in the 
handout. 

### 2 Peter

Looking first at 2nd Peter, you’ll see that in many ways it’s a symmetrical 
letter. It begins and ends with exhortations for believers. First, in 1:1-15, 
Peter reminds them that they are saved only by God’s power and calls them to 
“make every effort” to live in a way that confirms God’s work in them. 
Similarly, the book closes at the end of chapter 3 with an instruction to “make 
every effort” to live in holiness as we wait for the second coming of Christ. In 
the the second section, Peter gives reasons we can be confident that Jesus is 
returning, and in the 4th section, 3:1-13, Peter explains what will happen when 
the day of the Lord comes. The middle section, then, chapter 2, is really the 
center of the book’s message. Peter describes the false teachers, their godless 
way of life, and the horrific destruction that will God will pour out on them. 

### Jude

And we see a similar structure in Jude. It’s one of the briefest books in the 
Bible – you can tell that Jude is like a loving father who is spurred to 
passionate writing by the dire circumstances his children face. Like 2 Peter, 
the center of the book is a portrait of the empty lifestyle of the false 
teachers and the judgment that awaits them. And immediately before and after 
that center portrait are again two exhortations – first, in verses 3-4, to 
contend for the faith, and second, in verses 17-23, to be built up in the 
knowledge and love of God. At the very beginning and end of the book, Jude in 
his greeting and doxology reminds his readers that in the midst of such 
falsehood, God is a true and faithful hope. God is the one who called them, and 
God is the one who will keep them from falling until they appear before his 
glorious presence.

## IV. Main Themes

Let’s turn to four major themes we see in these books. You can follow along in 
your handout.

### A. The Certainty of Your Call

Think about what Peter and Jude’s readers are facing. You’ve got false teachers 
looming, spreading error and confusion like confetti around the early church. 
In this climate, it was key for Christians to be sure of their salvation. So, 
first, the authors tell them that their __salvation is utterly and totally God’s 
work__. Look, for example, at the second half of Jude v. 1: “_To those who are 
called, loved by God the Father and kept for Jesus Christ_.” Being called means 
being chosen by God personally for new life in Christ. 

Peter says something similar in 2 Pet. 1:3-4. Go ahead and turn there: "_His 
divine power has given us everything required for life and godliness through the 
knowledge of him who called us by his own glory and goodness. By these he has 
given us very great and precious promises, so that through them you may share in 
the divine nature, escaping the corruption that is in the world because of evil 
desire._" What a comfort these words are: __He__ has given us everything we need 
for life and godliness. It’s through __His promises__ that we escape the 
 corruption of sin and become spiritually alive. Verse 1 says even our faith 
 is something we’ve received from God. Jesus died and rose for the salvation 
 of sinners. And by repentance and faith, we are clothed in the pure, 
 spotless, and complete righteousness of Jesus.

And yet, even though our calling is from God, it has implications for us. Peter 
continues in verses 5-11: "_For this very reason, make every effort to 
supplement your faith with goodness, goodness with knowledge, knowledge with 
self-control, self-control with endurance, endurance with godliness, godliness 
with brotherly affection, and brotherly affection with love. For if you possess 
these qualities in increasing measure, they will keep you from being useless or 
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. The person who lacks these 
things is blind and shortsighted and has forgotten the cleansing from his past 
sins. Therefore, brothers and sisters, make every effort to confirm your calling 
and election, because if you do these things you will never stumble. For in this 
way, entry into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ will be 
richly provided for you._"

He’s saying: God has saved you. Now, your responsibility is to live in such a 
way that confirms that you really are saved. Here’s a great example of how the 
Bible upholds both God’s sovereignty and human responsibility: It’s God who 
calls, and yet God’s call results in our action. The image of adoption is useful 
for illustrating this – the Bible says elsewhere that God has adopted us as his 
 sons. And what do children do? They’re supposed to live Iike their father. 
 They uphold the family reputation. It’s like he’s saying, “You’ve been made 
 part of the family by grace, you didn’t earn it, and you can’t lose it. Now, 
 as you imitate the Father and live like him, your assurance that you really 
 are part of the family will deepen and grow.” 

So, Peter tells us to “__Make every effort to confirm your calling and 
election__” – verse 10. How? We make it sure by what we do: “_because if you do 
these things you will never stumble._” – not meaning that you’ll be perfect in 
this life or that you’ll never sin, but that the pattern of your life will 
confirm that your repentance and faith are genuine. What things do we do? 
Verse 5 – we make every effort to grow in Christ-like virtues and qualities. 

To put it in more theological language, sanctification, the process by which we 
become more like Christ, is both passive and active. It’s passive in that we 
depend totally on God’s strength to grow us – verse 3, his power gives us all we 
need for godliness. He has given us his Holy Spirit. And it’s active in that we 
are responsible to pursue holiness the way an athlete fights for the gold medal. 

So let me ask us this morning: when was the last time you __examined the fruit 
of your life__? Look at the qualities Peter lists in verses 5-7 – goodness, 
knowledge, self-control – do you see evidence of these virtues in your life more 
and more as you follow Jesus? Do you expend effort on growing in godliness? Can 
you think of one way this upcoming week you could “make every effort” to grow in 
these characteristics? One of the ways we can serve each other as brothers and 
sisters is by helping to give one another this assurance that Peter is talking 
about. We should notice evidences of grace in the other members of this church, 
and we should tell them about it! “Hey, I just wanted to let you know, I can see 
how God has grown you in perseverance this past year and you should be comforted 
to know that the Spirit is at work in you!” 

Jude’s letter has a good reminder for us here. He says in verse 21, “_keep 
yourselves in the love of God_.” – that’s this kind of active sanctification 
we’ve been talking about – but then he adds, “_waiting for the mercy of our Lord 
Jesus Christ that leads to eternal life_.” It’s not our good deeds that cause us 
to persevere to the end. It’s the __mercy of Jesus__. So: one of the ways we 
_know_ we are saved is by the evidence in our lives. But the way _that_ we are 
saved is by trusting in the mercy of Jesus alone. 

The first certainty is the certainty of our call; Second is

### B. The certainty of God’s truth

When falsehood is waiting around every corner, we don’t just need to be certain 
about our own faith – we need to be certain about what’s true. 

So, Jude tells his readers in verses 17-18 to __remember what was predicted by 
the apostles__. Their teaching is true. They predicted false teachers would 
come, and now false teachers are here, so that’s one good piece of evidence that 
their teaching is correct! 

And then in 2 Peter chapter 2 he says, “listen, the false teachers will make up 
stories and introduce heresies.” But we have something far better: Look __at 
1:19-21.__ “_We also have the prophetic word strongly confirmed, and you will do 
well to pay attention to it, as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until the day 
dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts. Above all, you know this: No 
prophecy of Scripture comes from the prophet’s own interpretation, because no 
prophecy ever came by the will of man; instead, men spoke from God as they were 
carried along by the Holy Spirit._”

Why should we trust the writings of the Old Testament? Because they are God’s 
Word. Here we have one of the clearest statements in scripture about the Bible’s 
inspiration. The authors used words and concepts natural to them, but the source 
of the revelation was the Holy Spirit. So if anyone comes and teaches in 
opposition to the scripture – then they teach in opposition to God himself. 

And, importantly, God’s Word is __not just the Old Testament__. Look at 2 Pet. 
3:15-16: “_Also, regard the patience of our Lord as salvation, just as our dear 
brother Paul has written to you according to the wisdom given to him. He speaks 
about these things in all his letters. There are some matters that are hard to 
understand. The untaught and unstable will twist them to their own destruction, 
as they also do with the rest of the Scriptures._” This is a significant verse, 
because we have one of the early church apostles already calling Paul’s writing 
scripture. And, what a comfort to know that we aren’t the first to find some 
parts of Paul’s letters hard to understand, right?! 

All of this should be a reminder to us: A Christian is an echo-chamber of God’s 
Word. The church is the community in which God’s Word reverberates. I appreciate 
in 2 Peter 3:2 where he tells his readers and us, what he wants us to do, 
straight up, pure and simple: “_you recall the words previously spoken by the 
holy prophets._” What do you do to keep God’s Word on your mind? He says in 
1:19 that we should pay attention to the Word like we would to a light shining 
in a dark place. If you’ve ever been out in the woods late at night; if you’ve 
ever been in a dark area where you don’t know how to get back to your cabin or 
your car; what do you need? The light. Maybe the problem is that we so often 
forget just how dark the world is. We get comfortable, our retinas adjust, and 
we think we can make it on our own in woods. We should pray that each day we 
might recognize the value of the light of God’s Word. We should point one 
another to the light of God’s Word. What’s the greatest resource I have in 
making sure I know how to discern which “Christian” book I pick up at the 
airport is actually true – the light of God’s Word. False teachers --> they 
breed uncertainty. God’s Word --> leads us to certainty of the truth.

Let’s turn to theme that is front and center in each of these books:

### C. The Certainty of Bad Fruit from False Teaching

Peter says in 2 Pet. 3:3, “_Above all, be aware of this: Scoffers will come in 
the last days scoffing and following their own evil desires_” One of Peter and 
Jude’s main goals in writing? It’s that their readers wouldn’t be surprised. 
They are saying: you can be absolutely, 100% sure that false teachers will 
emerge, and their fruit will be rotten. So don’t be shocked; be prepared.

One of the ways they call their readers to be prepared is by describing some of 
the __flawed doctrine__ these scoffers hold. We can sum it up this way: in 2nd 
Peter, the false teachers say “It doesn’t matter what we do because Jesus isn’t 
coming back.” Look at 2 Pet. 3:4: “_saying, “Where is his ‘coming’ that he 
promised? Ever since our ancestors fell asleep, all things continue as they have 
been since the beginning of creation.”_” And it’s similar in Jude. Here the 
false teachers say “It doesn’t matter what we do because God’s a God of grace!” 
Look at Jude v. 4, starting in the middle of the verse, he refers to these 
false teachers as: “_ungodly, turning the grace of our God into sensuality and 
denying Jesus Christ, our only Master and Lord._”

We saw in the letter of Galatians that one of the false teachings that can 
cripple the church is legalism – the idea that we have to earn our standing in 
God’s sight by obeying his law. But in these two letters, we’re on the other 
side of the spectrum. Here, we’re dealing with __antinomianism__ – literally, 
_anti_, “against,” _nomos_, “law.” These false teachers twist the Gospel so that 
God’s grace is not about us being forgiven so we can please God; it’s about God 
not caring so we can please ourselves. 

But the main way Peter and Jude call their readers to be prepared is by 
describing the __godless lifestyle__ of these teachers. Just as Jesus taught in 
the Sermon on the Mount: “Watch out for false prophets. They come to you in 
sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ferocious wolves. By their fruit you 
will recognize them.”[^4] What kind of fruit do these teachers have?

- For one, they __reject authority__. 2 Pet. 2:10: _especially those who follow 
 the polluting desires of the flesh and despise authority. Bold, arrogant 
 people! They are not afraid to slander the glorious ones;_”
- Second, they __embrace immorality__. 2 Pet. 2:13-14: _They will be paid back 
 with harm for the harm they have done. They consider it a pleasure to carouse 
 in broad daylight. They are spots and blemishes, delighting in their 
 deceptions while they feast with you. [14] They have eyes full of adultery 
 that never stop looking for sin. They seduce unstable people and have hearts 
 trained in greed. Children under a curse!_
- And third, they __serve only themselves__. Turn over to Jude vv. 12 and 16: 
 “_These people are dangerous reefs at your love feasts as they eat with you 
 without reverence. They are shepherds who only look after themselves..._” 
 [Verse 16:] "_These people are discontented grumblers, living according to 
 their desires; their mouths utter arrogant words, flattering people for their 
 own advantage._".

These guys are like fake doctors who promise healing when they only want the 
money.

What are we called to do in __response__? Look at Jude 3: “_Dear friends, 
although I was eager to write you about the salvation we share, I found it 
necessary to write, appealing to you to contend for the faith that was delivered 
to the saints once for all._” __Contend for the faith__. 2 Pet. 3:17 says “_be 
on your guard, so that you are not led away by the error of lawless people and 
fall from your own stable position._” In other words, defend the truth of the 
Gospel against those who teach it wrongly, and live in obedience that provides a 
stark contrast with the lifestyle of those who rebel against Christ. Now, this 
doesn’t mean we should spend all day writing angry blog posts or turn every 
spiritual conversation into an argument. What it means is that we should know 
the truth, love the truth, and stand for truth even when it goes against the 
grain. 

For us, today, especially thinking about falsehood that slips in under Christian 
label, there is a whole host of unbiblical teaching that we need to be aware of 
and contend against. On the one hand, you’ve got groups like Jehovah’s Witnesses 
and Mormons that deny truth about Jesus, on the other you have the prosperity 
Gospel that misunderstands who God is and how he works. There’s theologically 
liberal Protestantism that rejects the bodily resurrection of Christ, and then 
there are those who may believe in Jesus but also discard key doctrines like the 
atonement, hell, and the idea that God knows the future. All of this means that 
we should do what Jude v. 20 says and build ourselves up in the most holy faith 
– making sure that we know the Gospel, we know the Word, and we’re sitting under 
faithful teaching. 

But in contending for the faith, we also need to know that it’s not our job 
ultimately to defeat false teachers. That’s God’s role. And that leads us to our 
fourth and final theme,

### D. The Certainty of God’s Judgment

Right now, we can only see the fruit. But God knows the heart. 

And so Jude says in v. 14: "_Look! The Lord comes with tens of thousands of his 
holy ones to execute judgment on all and to convict all the ungodly concerning 
all the ungodly acts that they have done in an ungodly way, and concerning all 
the harsh things ungodly sinners have said against him._"

What’s even more tragic is that the false teachers don’t realize this judgment 
is coming. In fact, as we saw in 2 Pet. 3:4, they mock the idea that Jesus would 
ever return. 

Why is it wrong to think God will never judge? Peter gives 2 reasons: First, 
time is completely different for God. Look at 2 Pet. 3:8: “_With the Lord one 
day is like a thousand years, and a thousand years like one day._” Second, the 
fact that God hasn’t judged yet doesn’t mean he never will. In fact, the reason 
judgment hasn’t come yet is because he is merciful. 3:9, “_The Lord does not 
delay his promise, as some understand delay, but is patient with you, not 
wanting any to perish but all to come to repentance._.”

But when God does judge, it will come suddenly. 3:10, "_But the day of the Lord 
will come like a thief; on that day the heavens will pass away with a loud 
noise, the elements will burn and be dissolved, and the earth and the works on 
it will be disclosed._"

But false teachers aren’t the only ones who will face God’s judgment; we will, 
too. And when we face God on that day, our teachers won’t be standing beside us. 
Each of us will someday give account for how we have used the lives God gave us. 
It may be a useful exercise this week to look through the passages in these 
books that describe the false teachers, and reflect on the fact that without the 
grace of Jesus – the false teachers would be us. Selfish, lustful, manipulative, 
grumblers and faultfinders... 2 Pet. 2:19, “slaves of corruption.” We should be 
in shock and awe at the great, painful judgment that awaits false teachers. But 
we should be in even more shock and awe that Jesus took every ounce of the 
destruction we deserve, for all who would repent and believe.

Since God is indeed coming to judge the whole universe, how should we live? 2 
Peter has a couple of instructions for us:

- First, __Pursue holiness__. 2 Pet. 3:11-12: “_Since all these things are to be 
 dissolved in this way, it is clear what sort of people you should be in holy 
 conduct and godliness as you wait for the day of God and hasten its coming._” 
 Don’t live as if God doesn’t care. Don’t take his patience as license to sin. 
 We can ask ourselves, in moments of temptation: “On the day of God, will I be 
 happy that I indulged this sin?” Pursue holiness.
- Second, __Look forward__. 2 Pet. 3:13: “_But based on his promise, we wait for 
 new heavens and a new earth, where righteousness dwells._” What will that new 
 heaven and new earth be like? A home of righteousness where wrong, and 
 injustice, and rebellion are vanquished. Why would we not long for such a 
 place? And God has given us his Word so that we can know something of this new 
 heaven and new earth – the books of Thessalonians and Revelation that we’ll be 
 studying in the next few weeks will point our gaze to that day. We can 
 meditate on heaven. It’s kind of like a travel guidebook – I love these 
 things, if I’m going somewhere where I haven’t been, I grab the guidebook from 
 the library, look at the pictures, imagine the streets, anticipate the taste 
 of the food – I love meditating on where I’m going. Of course, when I get 
 there, usually it’s much better than I ever imagined. Brothers and sisters, 
 how much more will heaven exceed every meditation and anticipation of our 
 hearts. We should meditate on heaven.

That’s what 2 Peter and Jude call us to do – to look forward to that day when we 
will see Christ face to face.

## Conclusion

In many ways, reading 2 Peter and Jude is like stepping out into the winter air. 
These books confront us with the cold reality of false teaching and the calling 
for us to brace ourselves and contend for the faith. It’s enough to leave us 
 feeling a bit scared and inadequate, if we’re honest. But these authors do 
 not want us to be without hope. In the end, we can be certain of our call – 
 we can be certain of God’s Word – we can be certain that false teachers’ bad 
 fruit will be recognizable – and we can be certain that God himself will 
 judge. And we can be certain that in the midst of all, God will sustain us 
 and keep us until the end. So listen to how Jude closes his letter and let’s 
 take comfort in the reality that this is the God that we serve:

> Now to him who is able to protect you from stumbling and to make you stand in 
> the presence of his glory, without blemish and with great joy, to the only God 
> our Savior, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, power, and 
> authority before all time, now and forever. Amen.

[^1]: “Jude” is an English translation of the same Greek word “Ioudas” which can 
also be translated “Judah” or “Judas” – so it is likely that the Judas of Mt. 
13:55 and Mk. 6:3 is the Jude of this book.

[^2]: Early Church Fathers said that this episode was found in The Assumption of 
Moses. See Carson and Moo, p.694.

[^3]: Acts 17:28: “‘For in him we live and move and have our being.’ As some of 
your own poets have said, ‘We are his offspring.’” 1 Cor. 15:33: “Do not be 
misled: ‘Bad company corrupts good character.’”

[^4]: Mt. 7:15-16
