---
title: Class 6 - Acts, Paul - Introduction
subtitle: New Testament Seminar
institute: Immanuel Church
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{fancyhdr}
  - \pagestyle{fancy}
  - \fancyhead[RO,RE]{Class 6 - Acts, Paul - Introduction}
  - \fancyhead[LO,LE]{New Testament Seminar}
  - \usepackage{tikz}
  - \usetikzlibrary{calc,shapes.multipart,chains,arrows}
fontfamily: libertine
fontfamilyoptions: sfdefault
---

# Acts: The Kingdom Expands

As we get started, just a word about the purpose for this core seminar.  The objective of this New Testament class is __*to provide an overview of the core message of each book of the New Testament*__.  Our goal is that this overview would serve 3 basic purposes in your life:  1) To __strengthen__ personal meditation and study as you seek to know God’s Word and live according to what it says; 2) to __broaden__ your understanding of the grand story of scripture and how it centers on the person and work of Christ; and 3) to __equip__ you for fruitful discipleship and evangelism as you explain God’s Word to others.  So, with that objective clear, let’s turn to our subject for today.  

Today, Christians have met across the Asian continent, from Japan and China to India and the Arabian Peninsula. Believers in Australia worshiped the risen Christ while we were asleep. Up and down Africa from Cape Town to Cairo, across Europe in cities like Geneva, Oslo, London, and Vienna. Below the equator in South America, hundreds of thousands in Brazil and Chile and Argentina met for the same purpose. Even right now, hundreds of thousands are meeting up and down the East Coast of the United States, and many more will meet later this day across this country from Chicago to Dallas to Denver and up the Pacific Coast from San Diego to Seattle. And then out through the islands of the Pacific. The resurrection day of Jesus will be celebrated until people from every corner of the globe have gathered together to worship the Risen Christ!

Have you ever thought about how we got to this point? Well, in the book we are considering today we are going to explore how the Kingdom of Christ spread from the Roman outpost town of Jerusalem to the very heart of the ancient civilized world... Rome itself. And that will teach us why this Kingdom has continued to expand throughout the nations of the world since Luke wrote Acts almost 2000 years ago!

The book opens picking up where Luke left off in his Gospel account, with Jesus giving parting instructions to His disciples and then ascending up to Heaven.  For context, turn with me to Luke 24:46-49: “He also said to them, 'This is what is written: The Messiah would suffer and rise from the dead the third day, and repentance for forgiveness of sins would be proclaimed in his name to all the nations, beginning at Jerusalem. You are witnesses of these things. And look, I am sending you what my Father promised. As for you, stay in the city until you are empowered from on high.'” Likewise, Luke begins Acts with a similar recounting of this event, like TV sequel:  “Previously, on ‘24’...”  Skip over John and turn to Acts 1:6-8.  Luke writes, "So when they had come together, they asked him, 'Lord, are you restoring the kingdom to Israel at this time?' He said to them, 'It is not for you to know times or periods that the Father has set by his own authority. But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come on you, and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth.'" And with that introduction, Luke accomplishes two things.  He connects the Gospel of Luke to Acts, and he provides a preview of what we will see through the rest of Acts: before the final culmination of Christ’s kingdom, the gospel will go to Judea, to Samaria, and to the ends of the earth. And as we see God’s sovereign hand through Acts, we will grow to understand how He has likewise continued this expansion to and through us today!

## Background

Before we consider the message of the book, some brief comments on its background. As we have already considered last week, Luke, the companion of Paul, wrote both the Gospel of Luke and Acts.  It’s likely that they came as a two volume set early on, and not until later were they separated with John placed in between them. The book was likely written not long after Luke’s Gospel in the early 60s AD. While not a precise chronology or a comprehensive recounting of the events of the early church, Acts can be considered a historical work. Luke was a careful researcher as evidenced in his Gospel account and we have no reason to doubt the historical/factual veracity of Acts either.

Why did Luke write?  Scholars have suggested a number of purposes for Acts including: reconciliation of Jewish and Gentile Christianity, providing an apologetic for why Rome should consider Christianity a legitimate religion, and defending Paul’s ministry.  While all these could have been some of the things the Holy Spirit was looking to accomplish through Acts, we should understand the primary purpose to be the edification of Christians. It was written to build us up in our faith.  To quote one theologian, “Luke [edifies us] by describing the historical foundation for Christian faith and by showing, through this historical survey, that the church of his, and Theophilus’s, day is the culmination of biblical history. God’s salvation was revealed in, and made available through, his Son, Jesus Christ. The message of that salvation was entrusted by Christ himself to his apostles, and through the empowering and directing of the Holy Spirit, they have now brought that message, and the salvation it mediates, to 'the ends of the earth.'”[^1]

As we consider Acts today, I hope you will be encouraged to see where you fit into God’s redemptive purposes and something of His sovereign care for you by expanding His Kingdom to the likes of us!  We’ll take the book in four main pieces.  First, we’ll look at the work of the __Holy Spirit__ in the book.  After all, though it is often titled the “Acts of the Apostles,” a more fitting name would be the “Acts of the Holy Spirit.”  Next, we’ll examine the __gospel message__ that propels the expansion of Jesus’ kingdom in this book.  Third, we’ll spend some time tracing out exactly the __progression__ of that expansion — from Jerusalem to Rome.  And then finally, we’ll examine God’s __sovereign purposes__ in all of this.  Ready?  Let’s dive in.

## First, The Power of Kingdom Expansion — the Holy Spirit

Just as Christ had promised in Acts 1:8, the Holy Spirit does come.  Let’s look at Acts 2:1-4. As Luke recounts, “When the day of Pentecost had arrived, they were all together in one place. Suddenly a sound like that of a violent rushing wind came from heaven, and it filled the whole house where they were staying. They saw tongues like flames of fire that separated and rested on each one of them. Then they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in different tongues, as the Spirit enabled them.” This wouldn’t be the last time we read of this type of experience in Acts.  Flip to 8:17, where the Gospel is being preached in Samaria.  We are told that Peter and John “Laid their hands on them and they received the Holy Spirit.” Then look at 10:44-45.  We’re at the house of Cornelius the Roman Centurion, and we read, “While Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit came down on all those who heard the message. The circumcised believers who had come with Peter were amazed because the gift of the Holy Spirit had been poured out even on the Gentiles.” (Acts 10:44-45).  The same thing happens to the new believers in Ephesus in chapter 19.  Now, it’s significant that these obvious comings of the Holy Spirit mirror the stages of Jesus’ prophesy about the expansion of his church in 1:8.  We see this happening at Pentecost in Jerusalem.  And then when we see it when the Gospel comes to Samaria and to the Gentiles there; and finally, toward the ends of the earth in places like Ephesus.  The Holy Spirit in this book seems to act in ways that are extraordinarily supernatural in order to validate the message of the gospel when it first comes to new places.  As such, these remarkable works of the Spirit should be best understood as an extension of Pentecost, not necessarily the normative experiences of believers receiving Christ throughout the ages.  

Yet, that doesn’t mean that the Holy Spirit is not important or active today.  We need to listen to Luke – in Acts, he labors to prove to us that Jesus really did deliver on His promise to send His Holy Spirit to the Church – not just the early church, but all of us who believe in him.

And the filling of the Holy Spirit isn’t a one-time event.  It’s something that will continue to occur throughout the believer’s life -  in fact, in Ephesians, Paul actually *commands* us to “be filled with the Spirit.” As we continue on through the New Testament we will see the way that Christians grow in faith is not by reminiscing about the Holy Spirit’s miracles, but rather by having the Holy Spirit transform their character through the preaching of the Word and through the other Spirit-given gifts of edification (1 Cor. 12:7) in the church.

Therefore, a good question for us to ponder this afternoon might be, are you aware of and thankful for the Holy Spirit? There is a great tendency to either over-emphasize experiences of the Holy Spirit’s work, but it’s also dangerous to ignore Him altogether. We should rejoice that God by his Spirit is opening our minds to his Word, convicting us of sin, conforming us to the image of Christ, assuring us of God’s grace, and guiding us by his presence.

To summarize, in Acts, the Spirit provides the power that Christ promised before his ascension.  What does that power do?  That leads us to our second point:  the Spirit works through men and women to expand the Kingdom – by making known the Gospel of Jesus Christ.  

## The Message of Kingdom Expansion—The Gospel of Jesus Christ

Something fascinating that you see in the book of Acts is that, even though God is miraculously at work, every single conversion is due to a *person* explaining the message of the gospel.  So when God wants the Ethiopian eunuch to believe, he sends Philip to tell him “the good news about Jesus.” (8:35).  In the very next chapter, even after Jesus appears to Saul as the risen Christ, it is not until Ananias explains it that he receives the Spirit (9:17).  And then in chapter 10 God uses a series of visions to both Peter and Cornelius to bring the two of them together so that Peter can share the gospel with Cornelius.  For some reason, God has chosen to always work his divine power of conversion through human beings proclaiming the message of the gospel.  And what is that message?  Look at 2:38-39.  Peter proclaimed it at Pentecost: “Repent and be baptized, each of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. For the promise is for you and for your children, and for all who are far off, as many as the Lord our God will call.”  

It’s the same message of hope that we need to hear today.  It’s good news that declares to us that even though God is absolutely perfect – the Holy Spirit is *utterly* holy, set apart from us – and even though we have rebelled against this perfect God and broken his law in our sin, so that none of us is fit for his holy presence but instead deserve his judgment – in spite of all that, because of his mercy the Son of God came in the flesh to save us.  Jesus of Nazareth, through the willing sacrifice of his own life on the cross, reconciled us to God, so that we could be forgiven of our sins and by grace enjoy the presence of God’s Holy Spirit – if we would only repent of our empty, selfish ways and believe in Jesus as Savior and Lord.  That’s the Gospel.

And that’s why the point of Acts and what the Apostles teach all throughout this book was not ultimately Jesus’ life, but His death, resurrection and what he accomplished.  When they spoke about Jesus, they treated it much differently than a biography.  Most biographies give equal attention to every noteworthy detail of a person’s life.  But these apostles were fixated on the *end of the story*.  The core of their message was the death and resurrection of Jesus.  As an example, look at Acts 3:13-15: “The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our ancestors, has glorified his servant Jesus, whom you handed over and denied before Pilate, though he had decided to release him. You denied the Holy and Righteous One and asked to have a murderer released to you. You killed the source of life, whom God raised from the dead; we are witnesses of this.”

So, the power behind the book of Acts is the Holy Spirit, but his means is the gospel.  What that means for us, today, as we see people all around us who do not trust in Jesus, is that we should __pray__ and __proclaim__.  Pray that the Holy Spirit would miraculously change hearts.  But don’t just pray and then sit on your couch; proclaim the good news with boldness and grace, in joyful times and in the midst of persecution, like the believers in Acts.

We’ve seen the power and the message of Kingdom Expansion, and next we’ll look at the progression of the Kingdom in acts.  Before we get there, __*any questions*__ on what we’ve seen so far?

## The Progression of Kingdom Expansion

We are going to spend most of our time this morning considering this progress of the Kingdom’s expansion. Those first verses of Acts provide an excellent breakdown for the entire book, “you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.” From Jerusalem, to Rome.

From 2:42-6:7, Luke recounts for us what is going on at the church in Jerusalem.

He moves to geographic expansion in 6:8-9:31, beginning with the speech of Stephen before the Sanhedrin.  Stephen boldly lays out a Biblical theology for why the Kingdom was never meant to be confined to a particular ethnic people, the Jews.  What’s the response?  He’s stoned.  Yet after Stephen is killed, we see that the Gospel spreads throughout Judea and to Samaria.  Philip explains the Gospel to a court official to the queen of Ethiopia in chapter 8 (8:26-40), and Saul of Tarsus, the future missionary, is converted in chapter 9 (9:1-30).

The first half of Acts, in which Peter is the central character, wraps up (9:32-12:34) with a dramatic account of the Gospel being brought to the Roman Centurion Cornelius in chapter 10. Consider how monumental this was for Peter to be called to bring the Gospel to a Gentile. We read that Peter was shocked at God’s insistence to not consider unclean what God has called clean; the Lord is challenging the very heart of what Peter valued as a Jew.  Let’s read 10:27-29.  Luke recounts for us that “While talking with him, he went in and found a large gathering of people. Peter said to them, 'You know it’s forbidden for a Jewish man to associate with or visit a foreigner, but God has shown me that I must not call any person impure or unclean. That’s why I came without any objection when I was sent for. So may I ask why you sent for me?'” We read that immediately after hearing the Gospel and believing, Cornelius and those in his household experienced the same outpouring of the Holy Spirit that was experienced at Pentecost. What must have Peter been thinking? Could the words of Christ recorded in Luke 13 have been ringing in his ears at this moment? “What is the kingdom of God like, and what can I compare it to? It’s like a mustard seed that a man took and sowed in his garden. It grew and became a tree, and the birds of the sky nested in its branches.” (Luke 13:18-19). Here is Peter, the one who had persistently confused Christ’s Kingdom with false Jewish Messianic dreams. Now, he is an instrument of exactly the kind of Kingdom Christ had begun to establish.  To use the imagery from Jesus’ parable in Luke 14, Peter was now the one to invite new guests to God’s wedding banquet -- ones that would seem most undeserving of the privilege.

It wasn’t just a new experience for Peter; we see that as the Gospel expanded to the Gentiles, it forced the Jewish Christian community in Jerusalem to begin grappling with some basic questions about the nature of the Gospel and its expansion to the Gentiles. Luke recounts in chapter 11, “when Peter went up to Jerusalem, the circumcised believers criticized him and said, ‘You went into the house of uncircumcised men and ate with them’ (11:2-3). So Peter recounts the entire event, including God’s call to him and the subsequent outpouring of the Holy Spirit. After hearing all this, Luke tells us that, “When they heard this they became silent. And they glorified God, saying, 'So then, God has given repentance resulting in life even to the Gentiles.'” (11:18).

How do you respond to this early expansion of the Gospel? Can you identify with Cornelius – a gracious recipient of God’s grace even though he was not a Jew?  In the mighty providence of God, He has seen fit to expand His Kingdom to many more “Corneliuses.”   Can you identify with Peter, who at first didn’t understand this aspect of God’s plan?  There’s a lesson here: we should consider no one beyond God’s ability to reach; there is no people group that is “unclean” or “untouchable.” If you are tempted to see evangelism primarily in terms of sharing the Gospel with people relatively similar to you, read this account of Peter going to Cornelius. Consider that it would have been men similar to Cornelius who oversaw and carried out the execution of Jesus, and now Peter was bringing the Gospel message to one of these men! Peter went and shared, not because it was easy or convenient, but because of God’s mighty command.

Then in the second half of Acts, Luke takes the focus off of Peter and shifts the camera to Saul of Tarsus (Paul), who would be the vehicle God used to dramatically expand the kingdom into the Gentile world.

As the second half of Acts begins in 12:25-16:5, we see Paul and Barnabas heading from Antioch to Cyprus (where Barnabas was from), and then onto Pisidian Antioch, Iconium, Lystra and Derbe (all of which are in modern day Southwest Turkey). In each of these towns and cities, Paul and Barnabas established a patter of going first to the synagogue and teaching, encountering general Jewish rejection of the Gospel message, which results in Paul preaching to Gentiles, and finally Jewish persecution forcing them to leave. After retracing their travels back to Antioch in Syria, Paul and Barnabas were summoned back to Jerusalem to defend and discuss their Gentile outreach.

That is what they do in Acts 15, as they meet with the elders and apostles.  The central concern was whether Gentile converts must be circumcised or observe other aspects of the Jewish law in order to be Christians. The ever bold Peter rightly defends the work of Barnabas, saying, “we believe that we are saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus in the same way they are.” (Acts 15:11). The council agrees, and drafts a letter to Gentile believers asking them merely to encourage their fellow Jewish Christians by living upright lives and avoiding common stumbling blocks.

The rest of Acts, 16:6-28:31, is really about the continued expansion of the Gospel into the gentile world. Paul’s first trip went into modern-day Turkey; his second trip would take him to modern-day Greece. Paul and Silas travel to Macedonia, and after sharing the Gospel with Lydia in Philippi in chapter 16, Paul and Silas are arrested and thrown into prison. They are rescued in similar fashion as Peter had been earlier, but this time by a divinely appointed earthquake. They move on to Thessalonica and then Berea, before arriving in Athens. In Athens, Paul gives his famous address to the Areopagus, in which he quotes the Greeks’ philosophers and poets to gain a hearing and then proclaims to them the one true God.  Here was Paul embodying what he would teach later, that he became all things to all men – not by altering the message of Jesus Christ, but by focusing it to the background and context of his audience.  We must pray for faithfulness as we do the same thing every time we share the gospel with our children, with our atheist neighbor or new age classmate or Muslim co-worker or simply non-religious aunt and uncle.  

In chapter 18, Paul moves on to Corinth, where he spends time working with Priscilla and Aquila, who Luke tells us were also tentmakers. While in Corinth, the Lord speaks to Paul saying, “Do not be afraid; keep on speaking and do not be silent, for I am with you, and no one will attack you or harm you, for I have many in this city who are my people.” (Acts 18:9-10). What an encouragement that is in the midst of less obvious times of Gospel expansion. Paul, and every other Christian after him, can be encouraged in this ministry to be faithful.  God has chosen who will come to him. We don’t bear the responsibility of how much or how quickly the kingdom expands – God does. Our job is to faithfully proclaim the message of the gospel.

Then, in chapter 19, Paul moves onto Ephesus, where a riot ensues because silversmith workers recognize that Paul’s message is bad news for their business.  After all, they were idol makers, and Paul preached the exclusivity of Jesus Christ! Yet, in God’s providence the riot doesn’t do any harm to Paul or to the young church there. In fact, when Paul returns to Ephesus some time later he is able to encourage the Ephesian elders in what is perhaps the tenderest scene in the book of Acts.  Riots and opposition may come, but these men have the most weighty of responsibilities:  Verse 28, “Be on guard for yourselves and for all the flock of which the Holy Spirit has appointed you as overseers, to shepherd the church of God, which he purchased with his own blood.” (Acts 20:28)  As we read of suffering in Acts, let’s pray for our own pastors here at Immanuel, that they would lead us to rely on Christ in the midst of hardship.

After this second trip into Asia minor, Paul returns to Jerusalem, and trouble awaits him. The ensuing chapters in Jerusalem, chapters 21-26:32, provide some of the most gripping narrative in the New Testament outside of the Passion week accounts.  First, Jews stir up the crowds against Paul and he is arrested. He appears first before the Jewish Sanhedrin (22:30-23:10), and then he is transferred to a prison in Caesarea because of threats to his life in Jerusalem. He appears before Festus where he appeals his case to Caesar himself (25:1-12). In Acts 23:11, God had already promised Paul that he would proclaim the Gospel in Rome, and yet Paul didn’t just sit back and wait; in his appeal, he took advantage of his Roman citizenship, which God used to send Paul to Rome. In this case and throughout Acts, we see the Apostles and the early Christians taking bold action for Christ, using every resource the Lord had given for the purpose of expanding the Kingdom, and this is a good pattern for us. It is not wrong to use the gifts, opportunities, advantages, relationships that the Lord has given us for the purpose of expanding his Kingdom. It is a misinterpretation of the New Testament to think that Christians are called to “sit back” and wait for God. Certainly, patience and trust are part of the Christian life, but so is godly ambition!

After a long and dangerous journey, that included a shipwreck, Paul arrives in Rome and that is where Luke ends his story. In a matter of years after Christ’s death and resurrection, the Gospel has made its way from Jerusalem to the very center of power and culture at that time. What encouraging words Paul speaks at the conclusion of Acts, “Therefore let it be known to you that this salvation of God has been sent to the Gentiles; *they* will listen.”  

__*Any questions*__ on what we’ve seen of this Kingdom expansion so far?

## The Providence of Kingdom Expansion — The Sovereign God

Well then, it’s time for our final point.  If we’re tempted to place too much responsibility into the hands of Christ’s disciples for accomplishing his mission, as we were considering earlier, the wise words of a Pharisee named Gamaliel in chapter 5 offer corrective counsel.  In the early days of the church, the disciples were arrested and hauled before the Sanhedrin, the ruling group of Jews in Jerusalem.  After Peter and the apostles gave their defense, the Sanhedrin was ready to put them to death – until Gamaliel spoke up.  Look at Acts 5:35-39.  “Men of Israel, be careful about what you’re about to do to these men. Some time ago Theudas rose up, claiming to be somebody, and a group of about four hundred men rallied to him. He was killed, and all his followers were dispersed and came to nothing. After this man, Judas the Galilean rose up in the days of the census and attracted a following. He also perished, and all his followers were scattered. So in the present case, I tell you, stay away from these men and leave them alone. For if this plan or this work is of human origin, it will fail; but if it is of God, you will not be able to overthrow them. You may even be found fighting against God.”

The book of Acts, in a phrase, is one long validation that this was indeed of God.  Angels are sent to release Christ’s disciples from prison.  Numerous passages show how the events of the early church were fulfilling Old Testament prophesy.  The disciple that betrayed Jesus is replaced as predicted in Psalm 109:8 (1:16-20).  God pours out his spirit as Joel (2:28-32) had foretold (2:16-21).  And Israel persisted in unbelief, while the Gentiles believed — exactly what Isaiah (49:6) had said would happen.  And beyond the fulfillment of prophesy, we see that God does the work in the book of Acts.  He grants repentance (11:18).  He appoints for eternal life (13:48).  He opens the door of faith and the hearts of those who will believe (14:27, 16:14).  And it is this choosing of people to be his that God uses even as a motivation for missions, as he tells Paul to go to Corinth because “I have many people in this city” (18:10).  Indeed, the book of Acts tells us that even the death of Jesus was part of God’s great plan.  As Peter prays in chapter 4, “Indeed Herod and Pontius Pilate met together with the Gentiles and the people of Israel in this city to conspire against your holy servant Jesus, whom you anointed.  *They did what your power and will had decided beforehand should happen.*  Now, Lord, consider their threats and enable your servants to speak your word with great boldness.” (4:24-29)

Jesus said that even the “gates of Hades” (Matt 16:18) would not overcome his church because of God’s sovereign power behind it — and that is exactly what we see in the book of Acts.  God is at work.  Nothing can stop his hand, and his plan is worked out masterfully.  And what cause for hope that is for us!  To be sure, the church today is hardly a picture of perfect health.  Nor has its message yet rung out to every people group; though Christians can be found nearly everywhere on earth, as we thought about at the beginning of the class, there are still millions who have never heard the gospel of Jesus Christ.  And yet God is still at work. He continues to call men and women to faith in himself, he continues to expand his church, he continues to use weak vessels like us as his ambassadors, and the certain hope of the book of Acts is that he will accomplish all the work he has planned for us until our Lord returns again.

# Paul - Introduction

If you were in charge of approving missionaries for some mission agency, what kind of person would you send? Well, you’d want to pick someone who was obviously mature in their Christian faith, someone who would have some ability to connect with the people the person was going to share the Gospel with, probably someone with a proven ministry track record.

Would you choose a person who watched as a Christian preacher was stoned to death, and gave “approval to his death”? Would you choose the person who was known for “breathing out murderous threats against the Lord’s disciples”? Would you choose a man whose sole bent in life seemed focused on destroying everything the Christian faith stood for?  

Well if you were in such a position, you probably would not have chosen Saul of Tarsus to spread the message of Christianity across the Roman world. Sure he was well educated, but he was hardly a friend of Christians, and beyond that, even if such a figure were to be converted, why would you want to send one who had been a “Pharisee of the Pharisees” into the Gentile world?  

Thankfully, God does not act according to human wisdom, and He chose exactly this kind of man to bring the Gospel message to the very heart of the Gentile world.  Between the sections of Acts that tell his story and the letters he wrote, about a third of the New Testament is tied up with this apostle to the Gentiles.  So before we get to his letters, we will pause and consider Paul by answering three basic questions.  Who was Paul?  What was his ministry all about?  And what did he write?  

As we do, we will see even more of our God who does not act according to man’s wisdom, but instead gave “this treasure in jars of clay to show that this all-surpassing power is from God and not from us” (2 Cor 4:7). 

## Who was Paul?

Who was Paul?  For one, he was profoundly prepared for his work as an apostle. In part because at one point in time, he was a persecutor of the church.  We’ll start at the beginning of that remarkable transformation.  Paul was a man who had the highest possible pedigree among religious Jews.  In Philippians, Paul makes a significant statement about what he was:

“If anyone else thinks he has reasons to put confidence in the flesh, I have more: circumcised on the eighth day, of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; as to the law, blameless. But whatever gain I had, I counted as loss for the sake of Christ.” (3:4-6)

He was of the tribe of Benjamin: one of only two tribes from which people had remained uncontaminated by intermarriage at the exile. His parents perhaps chose the name Saul, as in the first king of Israel, also from the tribe of Benjamin.

He calls himself a Hebrew of Hebrews. Even though Saul wasn’t born in Palestine, but in Tarsus, his family had retained the old language. It wasn’t just that he’d learned Hebrew in his education: he was a Hebrew of Hebrews – that is his parents were Aramaic speaking. His parents were so faithful to the law that they had even had him circumcised on the eighth day.

He says that as to the law he was a Pharisee: we read in Acts 22:3 that Paul was educated under Gamaliel, the leading Pharisee of the day. We often think of “Pharisee” as a negative term. But the Pharisees were seen as the most careful and faithful Israelites. They abhorred how Israel had not learned her lesson from the exile, and they sought to enforce the law, so that something like the exile would never happen again. That is why they were so careful to obey the law. They were so careful that they put a fence around the law. Their additional laws were designed to stop people getting anywhere near breaking the law!

And as for zeal, Paul was beyond even his educator.  You’ll recall from the book of Acts that Gamaliel took a moderate and sensible position in regard to the early church, suggesting that the authorities leave it alone — that unless it was of God it would die out on its own.  But Saul thought that the Christians were far too dangerous for that. He would not have these people continue their false and perverted religion, and so to his later shame Paul became a persecutor of the church.

> As F. F. Bruce has written, ‘If Stephen argued, “The new has come; therefore the old must go”, Paul [sic] for his part argued, “The old must stay; therefore the new must go”. Hence the uncompromising rigour [sic] with which he threw himself into the work of repression.’[^2]

As Paul later said of the Jews, to him a crucified Messiah was a stumbling block (I Cor 1:23). Crucifixion was a pronouncement of God’s curse upon someone, for “anyone who is hung on a tree is under God's curse” (Deut 21:23). Thus, anyone who was saying that the Messiah had been crucified was speaking blasphemy, and must be put to death, lest the Lord send a blasphemous nation back into exile. Paul’s zeal to stamp out early Christians was apparently born out of a deep devotion to the Law as he understood it.

But Paul was a complex individual, for in addition to being a Hebrew of Hebrews, Paul was a Roman citizen. And as we earlier mentioned, Paul used his Roman citizenship for the spread of the Gospel (Acts 22:25-29 and 25:10-12). It should be noted that Roman citizenship was not something to be taken lightly. Carson, Moo, and Morris tell us, “The Romans did not confer citizenship on just anyone; only a small percentage of people who lived within the Roman Empire possessed this privilege. Paul’s Roman citizenship was inherited from his family (Paul claims, “I was born a citizen” [Acts 22:28]), perhaps because of some deed of service performed by his father or grandfather for the Romans. However achieved, Paul’s Roman citizenship was an important and providential qualification for his role as missionary to the Roman Empire.”

It is Paul’s Roman citizenship that, humanly speaking, drives him to the heart of the Gentile world, so that in the Lord’s providence he might fulfill his commission as the apostle to the Gentiles.

That is Paul’s background, part of his preparation for ministry.  But what happened that would change the heart of Saul of Tarsus to cause him to become one of the central figures of the New Testament? To put it succinctly, God intervened in this persecutor’s life, so that rather than persecuting, he would count it an honor to be persecuted for the sake of Christ. We read the familiar story in Acts 9:1-16 following the conversion of the Ethiopian official:

> “But Saul, still breathing threats and murder against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest and asked him for letters to the synagogues at Damascus, so that if he found any belonging to the Way, men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem. Now as he went on his way, he approached Damascus, and suddenly a light from heaven shone around him. And falling to the ground he heard a voice saying to him, “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?” And he said, “Who are you, Lord?” And he said, “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting. But rise and enter the city, and you will be told what you are to do.” The men who were traveling with him stood speechless, hearing the voice but seeing no one. Saul rose from the ground, and although his eyes were opened, he saw nothing. So they led him by the hand and brought him into Damascus. And for three days he was without sight, and neither ate nor drank. Now there was a disciple at Damascus named Ananias. The Lord said to him in a vision, “Ananias.” And he said, “Here I am, Lord.” And the Lord said to him, “Rise and go to the street called Straight, and at the house of Judas look for a man of Tarsus named Saul, for behold, he is praying, and he has seen in a vision a man named Ananias come in and lay his hands on him so that he might regain his sight.” But Ananias answered, “Lord, I have heard from many about this man, how much evil he has done to your saints at Jerusalem. And here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all who call on your name.” But the Lord said to him, “Go, for he is a chosen instrument of mine to carry my name before the Gentiles and kings and the children of Israel. For I will show him how much he must suffer for the sake of my name.”

God chose Paul, God converted Paul, and God would use Paul from this moment on to bring the Gospel to the nations! And isn’t this just like God? It may be tempting for us to read of Paul’s conversion and be discouraged that our own story doesn’t sound as impressive. The point is not Paul, though, and certainly not us.  The point is that God is expanding His kingdom and has graciously and mercifully decided to include the likes of Paul and the likes of us to be a part of His Kingdom and a part of seeing it expanded even more!

When God converted Paul, he also called him in a unique way, to become an Apostle to the Gentiles (9:15). There had been twelve apostles, signifying the reconstituted 12 tribes of Israel, and now Paul, the apostle to the Gentiles, becomes the “thirteenth apostle.” He was called, in an unusual way. Unlike the Jerusalem apostles, he wasn’t with the other apostles during Jesus’ earthly ministry.  But though he was distinct from the other apostles in the manner in which he was called and his experience, he preached the same Gospel. He makes this point in Galatians 1:11-23: the gospel that he preached is identical to the gospel the other apostles preached, not because he received it from them, but because he received it from the same Risen Lord Jesus Christ that they did.

This is who Paul was, a Hebrew of Hebrews, a Pharisee of Pharisees, a Roman Citizen, an Apostle, a Christian. But as his life changed to focus on spreading the good news, what was he about?  Let’s answer that question next.

## Paul’s Ministry

What made Paul tick?  What was his ministry all about?  Three things, as we’ll see in a moment.  He was about the gospel — the good news of Jesus Christ.  He was about the church — the body of Jesus Christ.  But ultimately, he was about God — the glory of Jesus Christ.  We’ll take each of these in turn.

### The Gospel

Throughout Paul’s ministry we see the centrality of the Cross and the Gospel Message. His calling as an apostle was one of proclaiming the gospel. As an apostle, then, he wasn’t primarily a pastor. We don’t see him stay in any one place for more than three years. He offers leadership in the churches until such a time as he can see elders raised up. And he wasn’t primarily a theologian, though his writings form much of the basis for our knowledge of God.  No: as an apostle, he was first and foremost a missionary. That is, one who preaches the gospel to those who have not heard it, in order that churches may be established.  And in this calling as a missionary, the gospel was central to everything he did.

That meant that he subjugated his methods to the gospel.  Think of his oft-quoted phrase from 1 Cor 9, “I have become all things to all people, that by all means I might save some. I do it all for the sake of the gospel, that I may share with them in its blessings.” (9:22-23)  The gospel never changes.  And so Paul’s methods change, to present the gospel in a way that is appropriate to the many different locations and cultures he preached in to.

Because the gospel was central to his mission, he not only subjected his methods to the gospel, but even his own comfort and well-being.  Earlier in 1 Corinthians 9, Paul explained that he denied even his rights for the sake of the gospel.

> Don't you know that those who work in the temple get their food from the temple, and those who serve at the altar share in what is offered on the altar? In the same way, the Lord has commanded that those who preach the gospel should receive their living from the gospel. But I have not used any of these rights. And I am not writing this in the hope that you will do such things for me. I would rather die than have anyone deprive me of this boast. Yet when I preach the gospel, I cannot boast, for I am compelled to preach. Woe to me if I do not preach the gospel!

And, of course, not being paid was the least of Paul’s discomforts.  He was shipwrecked.  Beaten.  Left for dead.  Went hungry and naked.  Abandoned by friends.  Imprisoned.  And finally, as best we know, executed.  All for the sake of the gospel.

So... Paul prioritized the spread of the gospel above his methods, above his comfort.  He was all about the gospel.  And so when we look through his letters, we see that when the integrity of the gospel message is in danger, Paul becomes his most ferocious.  False teachers, he called “savage wolves” to the Ephesian elders.  Those who would preach a gospel to the Galatian churches other than what they received from Paul — even from an angel of heaven—Paul prays that they might be eternally condemned.  Damned to hell.  He suggested that those who would teach that circumcision was required for salvation — suggesting that salvation was by God’s grace and our compliance — for those Paul suggested they should go all the way and emasculate themselves.  And when the Corinthian church persisted in fellowship with a man who was sleeping with his father’s wife — defaming the reputation of the gospel—Paul told them to hand him over to Satan.

Paul cared a lot about love, as we’ll see in a moment.  But he fought like a lion when the gospel was at stake.  He was all about the Gospel.  And so the letters we’ll look at are full of passion, at times vitriolic almost, when the gospel is threatened.  And they soar to unbelievable heights when Paul describes the beauty of the gospel.  “For we ourselves were once foolish, disobedient, led astray, slaves to various passions and pleasures, passing our days in malice and envy, hated by others and hating one another. But when the goodness and loving kindness of God our Savior appeared, he saved us, not because of work done by us in righteousness, but according to his own mercy.” (Titus 3:3-5a)  Amen.

Paul was all about the gospel.

### The Church

But secondly, Paul was all about the church — the body of Christ.  And in particular, the unity of the church.  When we read in the book of Acts that Paul is the apostle to the Gentiles, one implication of that is clear from the onset.  He will physically take the message to the Roman empire.  But a second implication emerges as his ministry matures.  Paul is the one the Lord uses to most comprehensively grasp the implications of the gospel for the unity of Jew and Gentile within the local church. Peter, even after the vision in Acts 10, doesn’t live out the implications of the Gospel to the removal of division between Jew & Gentile, and so Paul rebukes him to his face in Antioch (Gal 2:14-16).

> But when I saw that they were deviating from the truth of the gospel, I told Cephas in front of everyone, “If you, who are a Jew, live like a Gentile and not like a Jew, how can you compel Gentiles to live like Jews?” We are Jews by birth and not “Gentile sinners,” and yet because we know that a person is not justified by the works of the law but by faith in Jesus Christ, even we ourselves have believed in Christ Jesus. This was so that we might be justified by faith in Christ and not by the works of the law, because by the works of the law no human being will be justified.

Paul sees that since justification is by faith rather than ritual or ethnicity.  That means that *all* the barriers that were there under the Old Covenant, where people had to align themselves to the ethnic people of God if they were to receive God’s blessings, had been permanently removed at the Cross! See how Paul moves from the idea of Salvation by grace through faith straight into the removal of the great divide between Jew & Gentile in Ephesians 2:8-18:

> For you are saved by grace through faith, and this is not from yourselves; it is God’s gift— not from works, so that no one can boast. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared ahead of time for us to do. So then, remember that at one time you were Gentiles in the flesh— called “the uncircumcised” by those called “the circumcised,” which is done in the flesh by human hands. At that time you were without Christ, excluded from the citizenship of Israel, and foreigners to the covenants of promise, without hope and without God in the world. But now in Christ Jesus, you who were far away have been brought near by the blood of Christ. For he is our peace, who made both groups one and tore down the dividing wall of hostility. In his flesh, he made of no effect the law consisting of commands and expressed in regulations, so that he might create in himself one new man from the two, resulting in peace. He did this so that he might reconcile both to God in one body through the cross by which he put the hostility to death. He came and proclaimed the good news of peace to you who were far away and peace to those who were near. For through him we both have access in one spirit to the Father.

Paul understood at his core that unity within the local church was a critical implication of the gospel.  And so as he was all about the gospel, he was all about the local church.  Two sides of the same coin.  After all, it was his master, Jesus Christ, who had said “they will know that you are my disciples if you love one another.”  And so this idea of love, of unity for the sake of the gospel, absolutely covers Paul’s letters.

So, that’s what Paul was about.  The gospel.  The local church.  But what drove his passion behind both of those?  It was his passion for God’s glory.

### God’s Glory

What drove Paul’s theology, what was at the heart of his message, were the same things we read about from Genesis to Malachi, and from Matthew to Revelation. Paul’s theology was marked by a commitment to God’s glory. So, he says in Romans 1:5,

> Through him we have received grace and apostleship to bring about the obedience of faith for the sake of his name among all the Gentiles

It is the glory of God that is Paul’s ultimate concern, as it is the ultimate concern of every Christian. If we think of justification by faith as the center of Paul’s theology, we fail to recognize that the one who justifies as more central than the justification he offers. And then we fail to recognize that the whole purpose of justification is reconciliation with God. So God is the author of justification and God is the goal of justification.

Or if we only pay attention to the fulfillment of God’s promises to Abraham — another idea central to Paul’s thought, then we are forgetting that the promises to Abraham are about the blessing of God – and so the God whose approval we need is even more significant than the coming of that approval.

While it is true to say that the spread of the Gospel was Paul’s passion, the point of that Gospel message is God Himself. The value of the Gospel is that it is the message of how sinners, Jews and Gentiles, can be reconciled to God and live with Him forever.

Christ is the exact representation of God’s glory. Salvation brings praise to God’s glory. Eschatology is the hope of Glory. The Church is the display of God’s glory.  It’s all, ultimately about God’s glory.

All the things that Paul cared about.  The gospel.  The church.  Can in their own way substitute for God himself.  We can be so caught up in “winning souls” that it becomes about our efforts, not God’s glory.  We can be so caught up with sacrificial service in the local church that it becomes about our own efforts, not God’s glory.  And so this last and greatest passion of Paul’s is critical if we are to maintain a balanced and Godly focus as we glean the great wealth that there is in his epistles.

That’s the apostle Paul.  How God profoundly prepared him for ministry, and the passions on which that ministry centered. Before we close, let’s look and see how each of these things helps us in better understanding Paul’s letters from a macro perspective.

## What did he write?

Understanding Paul as a missionary, rather than primarily a pastor or theologian helps us to understand the nature of the letters that he writes. His concern is the missionary’s concern to ensure that the churches are well-founded on the gospel. He doesn’t write exhaustively everything that we need to know about Jesus. He often writes letters that highlight places where Paul perceived the gospel and therefore the church, to be under attack. His missionary work would be in vain unless those who had come to faith under his ministry persisted in the faith.

And so his letters are primarily about explaining the gospel, connecting that with how our life should be viewed corporately, as a local church — all the while extolling God for his glory in the gospel and in the church.  Getting this perspective right is essential if we are to read his letters as he wrote them and not turn them into legalistic dos and don’ts for the Christian life.

So, he writes Galatians because another gospel is being accepted. He writes 1 Corinthians because divisions are undermining the gospel. He writes Ephesians because he is concerned that the gospel be displayed. He writes Colossians because the gospel is getting affirmed but left in the background & marginalized. He writes the pastoral epistles because he is concerned that the gospel be passed on. He writes Philemon because he wants the gospel to transform social attitudes.

We see in his writing that practical Christian instruction is never divorced from the Gospel and truth about who God is. So we see in Romans, most of the book is devoted to explaining and magnifying the Gospel, and only after significant Gospel meditation, Paul turns to practical instruction for what righteous living looks like. Gospel understanding and Gospel belief produces Gospel living and never the other way around.

You see that same pattern in almost all of his letters.  Two halves.  The gospel on one hand, and life together as Christians on the other.  Descriptive sentences in the first half; imperative verbs in the second.  Neither makes sense without the other.  Gospel theology without corporate witness is worthless.  Like the demons who believe — and shudder — because that belief in truth has not been taken hold of with faith that displays itself in works.  And imperative verbs without the gospel?  The Old Covenant that, as Paul writes the Corinthians, “brought death.”

Even in a letter like I Corinthians, which is known for the practical admonition that Paul gives to that church, we see him begin by saying, “For the word of the cross is folly to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God.” (I Cor. 1:18).

We should be careful when we read and apply the letters of Paul. It can be easy to skip the “doctrinal” sections, and go straight to the practical advice for Christian living that Paul seems to be dispensing. Yet, if that is how we read our New Testament, we will miss the whole point. The point of Paul and every other writer is not to provide the new ethical manual for Christianity, but to further explain the implications of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. As soon as we separate the Gospel from the things we consider more “practical” we have lost the purpose of these books.

So, when you read Ephesians 4:29, “Let no corrupting talk come out of your mouths, but only such as is good for building up, as fits the occasion, that it may give grace to those who hear.” Be considering that instruction through the lens of Ephesians 2, “And you were dead in your transgressions and sins … But God, being rich in mercy, because of the great love with which he loved us, even when we were dead in our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ.” We don’t clean up our speech because it makes God happier with us, nor do we have the ability to speak perfectly regardless of our motivation.  No — our language is increasingly characterized by grace-infused words because our hearts have been transformed by God’s grace through Christ Jesus. Never read Paul, never read any of your Bible, without this perspective.

And it can be easy to think of all those imperatives as basically about me and my obedience.  But they’re not.  Read through these books anew as we study them in the next few weeks.  Ephesians 3 tells us “that God’s multi-faceted wisdom may now be made known _through the church_ to the rulers and authorities in the heavens.” (emphasis added) — and so it is our life corporately that is at the center of Paul’s focus.  Read these books to understand the corporate implications of the gospel.

## Conclusion

As we consider Paul’s letters in the coming weeks, we need to have the backdrop of his life, ministry, and theology in view. We should be asking ourselves certain questions. Are we ultimately concerned about God’s glory? Do the uses of our time, money, energy, and words, proclaim that God’s glory in Christ is what we care about? To what extent are our lives and decisions driven by the one overarching concern of how we can further the ministry of the gospel? We will see Paul’s letters as a great resource for evaluating ways in which the centrality of the Gospel might have been displaced in our own lives.

[^1]: Carson, Moo, and Morris, “An Introduction to the New Testament,” 198

[^2]: FF Bruce. Paul, Apostle of the Heart Set Free, 70